So a few important announcements before we start.
As you guys probably have already seen, hopefully
have already seen, Homework Zero has our setup
and you should check that out either today
or tomorrow because by Thursday, we're going to
need to set up have MongoDB set up
for our workshop on Thursday. Also, if you're
on Zoom, our Panopto livestream is hopefully working
now. If you go to weblab.is/livestream, you should
be able to go to Panopto where you
can easily toggle, like, you have multiple screens
between the video, which will have the whole
lecture hall, and the different slides, whatever, all
the computers that we have plugged in. So
if that's easier for you, feel free to
use that, but of course, we'll still always
have the Zoom room. No office hours today,
but milestone zero, where you form your team,
lock it on the portal, and submit a
Google form with 10 ideas for your website.
It's due on the end of day on
Wednesday. And reminder that you need to complete
all of the milestones in order to get
credit for the class. You be a team
by yourself, that's fine. We just need to
submit your milestones. And if you still need
a team even after our mixer yesterday, feel
free to check out there's a place on
Piazza where you can post about it. And
then, finally, recordings for day one are up
on YouTube, I think. Sanvid, are the recordings
from day one up on YouTube? Okay. Sanvid
is working on recording getting the recordings from
yesterday up on YouTube. And we will try
and get quicker in our turnaround time to
get all of the recordings up on YouTube,
so hopefully, the day of, or worst case
day after, we'll have all of the videos
up. But of course, you can always access
the slides on the schedule page on our
website, the schedule tab, or on our Google
Calendar if you add it to your decal.
That's probably one of the easiest ways to
get access to all of the slides and
videos as as they're up. Alright. Welcome, everyone.
Everyone looks a little bit sleepy. So hopefully,
coding will wake you up, question mark. Anyway.
So the topic of today is we're doing
a little bit more JavaScript. Yesterday, we just
blazed through a ton of syntax for all
the basic JavaScript stuff that you might need
to know, but today, we're actually going to
be talking about some things that are going
to be very important for what we're doing
in React. We're gonna be talking about callback
functions and arrays. You are going to see
this pretty soon later today as we start
talking about React in our lectures. So let's
dive in. So yesterday, we talked about how
you can define a function in JavaScript. We
have this example of a function that takes
the temperature in Celsius and converts it to
Fahrenheit. And we we noted that a function
is just an input, and then you feed
it into the body of a function, and
it produces some kind of output. And so
the input is in the parentheses, the arrow
represents feeding it in, and then the output
is the body of the function, which is
wrapped in curly braces. So this is what
a function represents and is stored in memory,
kind of like that gray little box. But
then, if we want to give that function
a name so we can call it, so
we can do things with it, we need
to create a variable and set it equal
to that function. And so this is the
syntax to do that. We saw this yesterday
where we have the variable, we're setting the
variable const Celsius to Fahrenheit equal to just
that exact same function. And the highlighted part
is the same as the function definition at
the top of the slide. Any questions on
this before I move on? Cool. This is
all just review from yesterday. And another thing
we're gonna review from yesterday, because you'll need
it in a sec, is push and pop
for arrays. If you have an array, you
can pop off the end or push a
new element to the end of the array.
So given these things, and if you need
the slides to reference the syntax, feel free
to pull it up. It's linked on the
schedule page of our website. Oh, the other
thing we needed to review is looping through
an array. So this is the syntax for
it. It's basically just creating an a variable
I that will keep track of the index
of our array, and then we increment that
every single time we go through the loop,
and we stop when I is equal to,
because that's a strictly less than, pets dot
length. So we go through every single element
of our array. Okay. So what I'm going
to ask you guys to do is write
a function that takes in not just one
temperature, but a whole array of temperatures, and
outputs another array that has all of those
temperatures but converted to Fahrenheit. And you should
not be mutating or changing the array that
is passed into the function. You should be
creating a new one and returning that new
array. And so you can the ways that
you could do this are you could honestly
write your code directly in the browser console
if you wanted, or you could just open
up your Versus code, create a new empty
file with that ends in dot j s,
write your code there, and then just paste
it into your browser console and run it
if you wanna test it. So I'll give
you guys, like, four minutes to attempt that.
Again, these slides are linked on the schedule
if you need to reference the syntax from
the previous slides. As always, add yourself to
the queue if you get confused, or just
flag me down. Zoom people, have you guys
been able to hear me okay? Yes. Okay.
Thank you. Give me, a show of fingers,
one, two, three, four, etcetera. How many minute
more minutes you think you need? Okay. Cool.
I will give you guys two more minutes.
Walk in circles around the lecture hall because
I have nothing else to do, so flag
me down if you get confused about anything.
Alright. For the sake of time, I'm gonna
pull everyone back together and start coding this
up. But if you did not finish, no
worries, you can just follow along with me.
So I'm just gonna go to my Versus
Code and create I'll just put this on
the side. And I'll create a new empty
JavaScript file. And I'm going to define my
function. Let's give it a name. Actually, no.
I won't give it a name right now.
We'll take in an array of temperatures in
Celsius, and then we're going to do something
with it. So first, we want to iterate
through our array of temperatures in Celsius. And
how we do that is we use a
for loop. So we'll say let I equals
zero, I is less than array Celsius dot
length, and increment I every time we go
through the loop. And so now we're going
to do something with array Celsius at index
I. But what are we going to do
with that? Well, we want to convert it
to Fahrenheit and then add it to a
new array that we're build. So we'll say
temp f, that's a singular temperature, is going
to be what is the formula? The temperature
in Celsius, which is the element of the
array Celsius at that index, times nine fifths
plus 32. And then we wanna add this
temp f to some kind of array. And
in order to that, we can just create
a new array, an empty array, that we'll
just call array f. And then every time
we go through the loop, we'll just do
array f dot push temp f. I think
that syntax is right. If it's wrong, someone
can raise their hand and correct me. And
so we go through why don't you need
the let in front of array f? I
do, actually. Actually, I'll call it const because
we're not going to change the place in
memory where array f points to, so we'll
just use const. Thank you for the correction.
And so now once we're done constructing our
array f, we are going to return it.
And I will now give this function a
name. I'll say const, array Celsius to Fahrenheit
equals that. And then let's paste this into
our browser console and see if it works.
So we can go something like that, and
then that will define the function. And then
we'll say, temps c equals, I don't know,
let's do, like, 20 degrees, 22 around room
temperature, zero, a hundred, or something like that.
And say, temps f equals and then we'll
pass in this array into our function. And
we get around room temperature, around freezing, around
boiling. Amazing. So I'll leave this code out
for a second. Does anyone have any questions
on the code that we just wrote? Alright.
Let's move on then. Okay. And this is
where the formula comes in. So now let's
say that we want to add some more.
I have some more operations I wanna do
on my temperatures. Let's say I want to
also convert an array of Fahrenheit temperatures to
Celsius. Or maybe I'm scientific and I wanna
convert my array of Celsius temperatures to Kelvin.
How would we do that? Well, you could
just take this code and copy and paste
it three times and just change a little
bit. But if you copy and paste this
code three times, notice that the only part
that we're changing is that part that I
highlighted in orange. The code the rest of
the code will be exactly the same. So
ideally, we would want to have some way
where we can reuse that 90% of the
code, everything except the part highlighted in orange.
Turn and talk to someone near you how
you think you might do that. Okay. I'm
gonna pull us back together. I'm not sure
if many people knew the answer because it's
kind of quick tricky. So okay if you
didn't. But we use callback functions. So how
are we gonna use a callback function? Well,
what we're going to do is we're going
to write a function that is the general
version of what we just saw. And so
what I want you to do is write
a function that's called modify array, and it'll
take in two inputs. It'll take in an
array, but it'll also take in a callback
function. And then it will return a new
array, the result of applying the callback function
to every element of our original array. What
the heck does that mean? That was a
lot of words. If I have my modify
array function and it takes in my array
and this callback function called transform func, then
it will apply this function to all the
elements of the array. If I have call
modify array on this array of cats, and
I pass in a function that is called
hatify, that will take in a cat as
input and output a cat with a hat,
then what my modify function will do is
it will call Hattify on every single one
of my cats and spit out this array
at the bottom of the slide, which has
all of my cats but now Hattified. So
now I'm going to ask you guys to
code this function, this modify array function. Mostly
focus on step one, but if you have
extra time, you are free to use your
modify array function and play around with it.
And on the bottom right of the slide,
that's the syntax reference for the array Celsius
to Fahrenheit function that I just wrote earlier.
So I will give you guys a few
minutes to attempt this and then talk to
someone next to you if you get stuck.
Alright. Hopefully, was enough time. If not, no
worries. The main, point of having you guys
code these things is just to get you
thinking about them. So if you were thinking
about it, then that's what we want. Alright.
So basically, to make this general modify array
function, all we need to do is take
this and we'll rename it. Oh, I have
it on the slides. I'll just do that.
It's easier than coding it. So all of
the changes that I made were just adding
in another parameter for the transform function. And
then instead of doing this very specific calculation
to convert from Celsius to Fahrenheit, now I
just apply the transform function to whatever element
of the array that I'm looking at. So
this is the things that I've changed. And
then if I were to actually call this
modify array function, then I would define a
function that takes in one temperature in Celsius
and outputs one temperature in Fahrenheit, that's the
c to f function there. And then I
call modify array with my c to f
function. Any questions on this code? Alright. Just
as a side note, one thing that we
can do is write functions in slightly shorthand
notation. In the bottom half, in the bottom
section of the code, that's more similar to
the functions that we've been writing so far.
But we can also, if there's The only
thing in our function is just a single
return statement, then we can shorten it by
just having the input in parentheses, the arrow,
and then the output in parentheses. So it's
very much like input feeds into your output
kind of notation. And this is just the
more general way of thinking about this, of
the two different notations that we can use
to write functions in JavaScript. Okay. Well, it
turns out that there's a function that is
modify array because some very smart JavaScript people
recognize that this is a thing that we
might have to do all the time. And
so the map function is almost exactly the
same as the modify modify array function that
we just wrote, but the only difference is
that you need to take the array and
do the array, the name of the variable
that holds your array and then dot map,
instead of having that array as a parameter
to your map function. I'll give you a
sec to look at this code, make sure
you understand what map does. Okay. Since we
are pretty short on time, I'm actually not
going to do this map practice. But the
basic idea is that we want to we
have rectangles, which is array of JavaScript objects,
and then we want to use map to
create an array that contains the areas of
those rectangles. So why don't I ask you
to just turn to someone next to you
and just talk out verbally how you would
implement this, because we don't have much time
to code it. Alright. I'll pull us back
together and show the solution. Nope. Nope. There's
no solution. Okay. That works. Alright. You know,
I'm gonna just put the solution on a
slide after this and you guys can look
at it and try this practice afterwards, if
you have time, as an extra little homework
thing, because I need to make sure that
the next group has enough time to do
their lecture. So the next concept we're introducing
is filter. It's very similar in a map,
but it just does a different thing. So
if we have an array, then we can
do filter and then that filter takes in
a function, but this function takes in a
single element of the array and outputs a
boolean, true or false. And so basically, we
feed so for in this example, we have
this array of numbers, positive and negative in
the values array. And then we have a
function that takes in a single number and
outputs true if x is positive or that
particular element of array is positive, and false
if that is zero or negative. And so
then filter, what filter will do is it'll
go through every element of the array, feed
it into our function, and if that function
output's true, it'll keep that element. If the
function output's false, it won't keep that element.
And then, for example, on the bottom code
section of the slide, we have our staff
names. And let's say I just really don't
like Annabelle, and so I want to filter
out I I want this function to return
false only if the staff name is Annabel.
And so that way, I can have a
new array that contains everyone except Annabel in
it. Sad. Okay. This is also going to
be extra practice for after you can view
these slides and try it out yourself. So
question, why in in a very general sense,
why do we use callback functions? Well, one
is for reusability. For map and filter, we
don't wanna have to rewrite the code to
iterate through the array, pass the elements through
this function every single time, and so we
use callback functions. But another way another reason
we use callback functions is abstraction. What does
that mean? It means sometimes I wanna write
code that says, when this happens, do something
else. Do this. And what callback functions allow
us to do is write the code for
the do this, write the code for what
I should be doing, and let other smart
people, also known as the writers of the
JavaScript libraries, write the code for when x
happens. So for example, let's say we have
a function called update animation, and we wanna
call that every ten milliseconds. Maybe we're making
a game or something and we need to
update the display, and we know how to
how we wanna update the display according to
the game we're making. And so we have
this function, update animation, that we wrote. However,
we don't want to write code to manage
timers, interfacing with the computer clock or something
with the browser or, I don't know. It's
just a lot of low level code that
is kind of complicated and we don't wanna
write it ourselves. So the JavaScript authors did
it for us. And so they wrote this
JavaScript library function called set interval, and that
interval will call whatever callback function is passed
into it, which in this case is our
update animation, every ten milliseconds. And so we
wrote the code for update animation. The JavaScript
authors wrote the code for set interval that
allows us to that allows this function to
be called every ten milliseconds. And we're happy
because all we had to worry about was
updating our animation. Okay. So next up, I'm
just gonna flash up a few slides. You
probably won't recognize any of this code. You
probably won't fully understand what it means, but
I'm just gonna show you. And we'll see
this later in WebLab. And so I want
you to just mark this down in your
head and remember, oh, this is a callback
function. And so when you see it later
in WebLab, you can note, oh, that's a
callback function, and think about it in terms
of callback functions. So this is one example
where we wanna get something from a database
and then we once we receive that thing,
that's what the dot then means. Once we
receive the thing back from the database, then
do this. And so the reason we use
a callback function is cause we don't know
how to write the code that detects whether
the thing has been received from the database,
but we do know what we wanna do
once we get that information back. We wanna
send it in this case, we're sending it
back to the front end. And then similarly
to this, in our back end code, you're
gonna see code like this that says, when
we receive an HTTP request to this particular
endpoint, we want to do this, do something.
And so alright. My clicker isn't working now.
But basically, we don't wanna write the code
that detects whether we get an whether we've
received an HTTP request or not. That's some
kind of weird low level stuff with ports
and everything. But we know that as soon
as we get an HTTP request that follows
this particular form, we want to do some
stuff with it. And so in general, whenever
you see the syntax for callback functions with
the parentheses and the input and the arrow
being passed as a parameter into another function,
I want you to think, like, what is
the when this happens and what is the
do this? Like, why are we using a
callback function here? And if you can think
about it in those terms, that will serve
you well for the rest of WebLab. And
this is just highlighting the particular the the
area that is itself the callback function. Okay.
I think that was the end of my
slides. So thank you all for bearing with
me, and take a couple minute break as
we transition into our Intro to React lecture.